[SYCL][Doc] Add release notes for July release (#4190)
intel/llvm: sycl/ReleaseNotes.md

# July'21 release notes

Release notes for commit range 6a49170027fb..962909fe9e78

## New features
 - Implement SYCL2020 specialized constants [07b27965] [ba3d657] [bd8dcf4]
   [d15b841]

>  - Provide SYCL 2020 function objects [24a2ad89]

Reviewer: These should be in past simple tense

 - Added support for ITT notification in SYCL Runtime [a7b8daf] [8d3921e3]
 - Implement SYCL 2020 sub_group algorithms [e8caf6c3]

>  - Implement SYCL-2020 `sycl::handler::host_task` method [75e5a269]

Reviewer 2: NIT: There's inconsistent spelling of "SYCL 2020"/"SYCL-2020"/"SYCL2020". I would suggest using "SYCL 2020" everywhere.

>  - Implement SYCL2020 `sycl::sub_group` class [19dcac79]

Reviewer: These should be in past simple tense

 - Added support for AMD GPU devices [ec612228]
 - Implemented SYCL2020 `sycl::is_device_copyable` type trait [44c1cbcd]
 - Implemented SYCL2020 USM features [1df6873d]
 - Implemented support for Device UUID from [Intel's Extensions for Device Information](doc/extensions/IntelGPU/IntelGPUDeviceInfo.md) [25aee287]
 - Implemented SYCL2020 `sycl::atomic_fence` [dcd59547]
 - Implemented `intel::loop_count_max`, `intel::loop_count_max`,
   `intel::loop_count_avg` attributes that allow to specify number of loop
   iterations for FPGA [f74b4ef]

>  - Impelemented generation of compiler report for kernel arguments [201f902]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Implemented generation of compiler report for kernel arguments [201f902]
```

 - Added [group sorting algorithm](doc/extensions/GroupAlgorithms/SYCL_INTEL_group_sort.asciidoc)
   extension specification [edaee9b]
 - Added [initial draft](doc/extensions/LevelZeroBackend/LevelZeroBackend.md)
   for querying of free device memory in LevelZero backend extension [fa428bf]
 - Added [InvokeSIMD](doc/extensions/InvokeSIMD/InvokeSIMD.asciidoc) and
   [Uniform](doc/extensions/Uniform/Uniform.asciidoc) extensions [72e1611]
 - Added [Matrix Programming Extension for DPC++ document](doc/extensions/Matrix/dpcpp-joint-matrix.asciidoc) [ace4c733]
 - Implemented SYCL2020 `sycl::span` [9356d53]
 - Added [device-if](doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc) extension
   [4fb95fc]
 - Added a [programming guide](doc/MultiTileCardWithLevelZero.md) for
   multi-tile and multi-card under Level Zero backend [d581178a]

## Improvements
### SYCL Compiler
 - Use `opencl-aot` instead of `aoc` when AOT flow for FPGA Emulator is
   triggered [3a99558]
 - Allowed for using an external host compiler [6f0ad1a]
 - Cleaned up preprocessing output when `-fsycl` option is passed [3a18db6]
 - Allowed kernel names in anonymous namespace [e47dbad]

>  - Set default value of `-sycl-std` to `2020` when  `-fsycl-is-device` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Set default value of `-sycl-std` to `2020` when `-fsycl-is-device` or
```

   `-fsycl-is-host` specified [680adc0]
 - Added implication of `-fPIC` compilation for wrapped object when using
   `-shared` [1754934]
 - Added a diagnostic for `-fsycl` and `-ffreestanding` as non-supported
   combination [a36c6720]
 - [ESIMD] Renamed `simd::format` to `simd::bit_cast_view` [653dede1]
 - Allowed `[[sycl::work_group_size_hint]]` to accept constant expr args
   [ef8e4019]
 - Deprecated the old-style SYCL attributes according to the SYCL 2020 spec
   [001bbd42]
 - Deprecated `[[intel::reqd_work_group_size]]` attribute spelling, please use
   `[[sycl::reqd_work_group_size]]` instead [8ef7eacc]

>  - Enabled native FP atomics by default [0bbb68ee]

Reviewer 3: If appropriate, I'd suggest a couple expansions for the items that I'm personally aware of:
```suggestion
 - Enabled native FP atomics by default [0bbb68ee]. Defining the `SYCL_USE_NATIVE_FP_ATOMICS`
   macro explicitly is no longer required - it is now automatically defined for hardware targets with
   "native" support for atomic functions.
```

>  - Ignore `-O0` option for device code when compiling for FPGA with hardware

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Switched to ignoring `-O0` option for device code when compiling for FPGA with hardware
```

>  - Ignore `-O0` option for device code when compiling for FPGA with hardware

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Switched to ignoring `-O0` option for device code when compiling for FPGA with hardware
```

Author: Looks like a duplicate of the previous comment.

>  - Ignore `-O0` option for device code when compiling for FPGA with hardware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Added ignore of `-O0` option for device code when compiling for FPGA with hardware
```

Author: Applied Artem's suggestion here.

   [7d94edf4]

>  - Allowed for known aliases to be used for `-fsycl-targets` [9778952a]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Allowed for known aliases to be used for `-fsycl-targets` [9778952a]. Passing
   `*-unknown-unknown-sycldevice` components of the SYCL target triple is no
   longer necessary.
```

 - [ESIMD] Added support for half type in ESIMD intrinsics [d5958ebf]
 - Implemented `sycl::kernel::get_kernel_bundle` method [69a68a6d]
 - Added a diagnostic in case of timing issues for FPGA AOT [c69a3115]
 - Added support for C `memcpy` usages in the device code [76051ccf]
 - [ESIMD] Added support for vectorizing scalar function [3fc66cc]

>  - Disable vectorization and loop transformation passes because loop unrolling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Disabled vectorization and loop transformation passes because loop unrolling
```

>  - Disable vectorization and loop transformation passes because loop unrolling
>    in "SYCL optimization mode" uses default heuristic, which is tuned for CPU
>    and might not be profitable for other devices [ff6929e6]

Reviewer 3: This is to align with other items grammatically:
```suggestion
 - Disabled vectorization and loop transformation passes because loop unrolling
   in "SYCL optimization mode" used default heuristic, which tuned the code for
   CPU and might not have been profitable for other devices [ff6929e6]
```

### SYCL Library
 - Added an exception throw if no matched device is found when
   `SYCL_DEVICE_FILTER` is set regardless of `device_selector` used [ef4e6dd]
 - Changed event status update to complete without waiting when run on CUDA
   devices [be7c1cb]
 - Added `sycl::bit_cast` [d4b66bd]

>  - Improved performance when executing with dynamic batching when using Level

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Improved performance when executing with dynamic batching on Level
```

   [50edee4]
 - Replaced use of `interop<>` with SYCL 2020 `backend_return_t<>` in
   `interop_handle` [d08c21a]
 - [ESIMD] Moved ESIMD APIs to `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::esimd` namespace
   [92da579]
 - Added global offset support for Level Zero backend [9ca2f911]
 - [ESIMD] Changed `simd::replicate` API by adding suffixes into the names to
   reflect the order of template arguments [e45408ad]
 - Disabled persistent device code caching by default [48f6bc9e]
 - Introduced `SYCL_REDUCTION_DETERMINISTIC` macro which forces reduction
   algorithms to produce stable results [a3fc51a4]
 - Improved `SYCL_DEVICE_ALLOWLIST` format [9216b49d]
 - Added `SYCL_DISABLE_PARALLEL_FOR_RANGE_ROUNDING` macro to disable range
   rounding [5c4275ac]
 - Disabled range rounding by default when compiling for FPGA [5c4275ac]
 - [ESIMD] Fixed a bug in `simd_view::operator--` [ccc97e23]
 - Fixed a memory leak for host USM allocations [c18c3456]
 - Fixed possible crashes that could happen when `sycl::free` is called while
   there are still running kernels [c74f05d6]
 - Deprecated `sycl::buffer::get_count()`, please use `sycl::buffer::size()`
   instead [baf2ed9d]

>  - Implemented `sycl::group::group_barrier` method [48363902]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 - Implemented `sycl::group_barrier` free function [48363902]
```

 - Added support of [SYCL_INTEL_enqueue_barrier extension](doc/extensions/EnqueueBarrier/enqueue_barrier.asciidoc) for CUDA backend [2e978482]
 - Deprecated `has_extension` method of `sycl::device` and `sycl::platform`
   classes, please use `has` method with aspects APIs instead [51c747da]
 - Deprecated `sycl::*_class` types, please use STL classes instead [51c747da]
 - Deprecated `sycl::ndrange` with an offset [51c747da]
 - Deprecated `barrier` and `mem_fence` methods of `sycl::nd_item` class,

>    please use `sycl::group_barrier()` free function instead [51c747da]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   please use `sycl::group_barrier()` and `sycl::atomic_fence()` free functions instead [51c747da]
```

   instead [dcd59547]
 - Added constexpr constructor for `sycl::half` type [5759e2a1]
 - Added support for more than 4Gb device allocations in Level Zero backend
   [fb1808b8]

### Documentation
 - Updated [sub-group algoritms](doc/extensions/SubGroupAlgorithms/SYCL_INTEL_sub_group_algorithms.asciidoc)
   extension to use `marray` instead of `vec` [98715ae]
 - Updated data flow pipes extension to be based on SYCL 2020 [f22f2e0]
 - Updated [ESIMD documentation](doc/extensions/ExplicitSIMD/dpcpp-explicit-simd.md)
   reflecting recent API changes [1e0bd1ed]
 - Updated [devicelib](doc/extensions/C-CXX-StandardLibrary/C-CXX-StandardLibrary.rst)
   extension document with `scalnbn`, `abs` and `div` (and their variants) as
   supported [febfb5a]
 - Addressed renaming of TBB dll to `tbb12.dll` in the
   [install script](tools/install.bat) [25433ba]

## Bug fixes
### SYCL Compiler
 - Fixed crash which could happen in corner cases when null attribute created
   [cec6469]
 - Fixed crash when lowering `__sycl_alocateLocalMemory` [4960e71]
 - Fixed workflow for multi-file compilation in AOT mode [a0099a5]
 - Fixed problem with unbundling from object for device archives for FPGA
   [25ea6e1]

>  - Do not imply `defaultlib msvcrt` for Linux based driver on Windows

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - Stopped implying`defaultlib msvcrt` for Linux based driver on Windows
```

   [d3dc212d]
 - Fixed handling of `[[intel::max_global_work_dim()]]` in case of
   redeclarations [9b615928]
 - Fixed incorrect diagnostics in the presence of OpenMP [cbec0b5f]
 - Fixed an issue with incorrect output project report when using `-o` option
   with FPGA AOT enabled [18ac1723]
 - Removed restriction that was preventing from applying
   `[[intel::use_stall_enable_clusters]]` attribute to ANY function [15da879d]
 - Fixed bugs with recursion in SYCL kernels - diagnostics won't be emitted on
   using recursion in a discarded branch and in constexpr context [9a9a018c]
 - Fixed handling of `intel::use_stall_enable_clusters` attribute [06e4ebc7]
### SYCL Library
 - Fixed build issue when CUDA 11 is used [f7224f1]
 - Fixed caching of sub-devices in Level Zero backend[4c34f93]
 - Fixed requesting of USM memory allocation info on CUDA [691f842]
 - Fixed [`joint_matrix_mad`](doc/extensions/Matrix/dpcpp-joint-matrix.asciidoc)
   behaviour to return `A*B+C` instead of assigning the result to `C` [ea59c2b]

>  - Workaround use-case when event isn't waited upon its completion but is

Reviewer: `[LevelZero]`?

Author: Mentioned Level Zero.

   [3e9ed1d]
 - Fixed a build issue when `sycl::kernel::get_native` is used [eb17836]
 - Fixed collisions of helper functions and SPIR-V operations when building with
   `-O0` or `-O1` [9f2fd98] [c2d6cfa]
 - [OpenCL] Fixed false-positive assertion trigger when allocation alignment is
   expected [3351916ad]
 - Aligned behavior of empty command groups with SYCL2020 [1cf697bd]
 - Fixed build options handling when they come from different sources
   [67411472]
 - Fixed host task CUDA native memory handle [e9cf124b6]
 - Fixed a memory leak which could happen if a command submission fails
   [67eac4bd]
 - Fixed support for math functions `floor/rndd/rndu/rndz/rnde` in ESIMD mode
   [de694dd8]
 - Fixed memory allocations for multi-device contexts on Level Zero [f83c9356a]
 - Renamed `sycl::property::no_init` property to `sycl::property::no_init` in
   accordance to final SYCL 2020 specification, the old spelling is deprecated
   [ad46b641]
 - Use local size specified in `[[sycl::reqd_work_group_size]]` if no local
   size explicitly passed [0a54bef2]

## API/ABI breakages
 - None

## Known issues
 - User-defined functions with the same name and signature (exact match of

>    arguments, return type doesn't matter) as of an OpenCL C built-in
>    function, can lead to Undefined Behavior.

Reviewer 3: (if I'm interpreting this correctly)
```suggestion
   arguments, return type doesn't matter), e.g. OpenCL C built-in
   functions, can lead to Undefined Behavior.
```

Reviewer 2: Is the intent here that this problem is specific to collision with OpenCL C built-ins? This is how I interpreted it, and I think the original fits way better if that's the case, and should definitely be reworded if it's not.

Author: It's quite old "known issue", my interpretation is that it is UB if a user defines a function which matches an OpenCL C builtin signature(e.g. `size_t get_global_id(size_t)`).
Please, let me know if some rewording is needed here.

Reviewer 3: Ah, I'm getting the intent now. I would suggest to reword the whole item in a more concise way:
```
User-defined functions with the name and signature matching those of any OpenCL C built-in function (i.e. an exact match of arguments, return type doesn't matter) can lead to Undefined Behavior.
```
Another point that could be specified is whether merely _defining_ the function or only calling such a user-defined function can cause UB.

Reviewer 5: > It's quite old "known issue", my interpretation is that it is UB if a user defines a function which matches an OpenCL C builtin signature(e.g. size_t get_global_id(size_t)).

That is not a UB per SYCL spec, that is a bug in our implementation

Author: >> That is not a UB per SYCL spec, that is a bug in our implementation

That's right, that is why it is in "known issues" section. Does wording suggested in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/4190#discussion_r679069696 sounds OK?

>> Another point that could be specified is whether merely defining the function or only calling such a user-defined function can cause UB.

I think both.

Reviewer 5: > Does wording suggested in #4190 (comment) sounds OK?

LGTM

# July'21 release notes

Release notes for commit range 6a49170027fb..962909fe9e78

## New features

>  - Implemented SYCL 2020 specialized constants [07b27965] [ba3d657] [bd8dcf4]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 specialization constants [07b27965] [ba3d657] [bd8dcf4]
```

   [d15b841]
 - Provided SYCL 2020 function objects [24a2ad89]
 - Added support for ITT notification in SYCL Runtime [a7b8daf] [8d3921e3]
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 sub_group algorithms [e8caf6c3]
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 `sycl::handler::host_task` method [75e5a269]
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 `sycl::sub_group` class [19dcac79]
 - Added support for AMD GPU devices [ec612228]
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 `sycl::is_device_copyable` type trait [44c1cbcd]
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 USM features [1df6873d]
 - Implemented support for Device UUID from [Intel's Extensions for Device Information](doc/extensions/IntelGPU/IntelGPUDeviceInfo.md) [25aee287]
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 `sycl::atomic_fence` [dcd59547]
 - Implemented `intel::loop_count_max`, `intel::loop_count_max`,
   `intel::loop_count_avg` attributes that allow to specify number of loop
   iterations for FPGA [f74b4ef]
 - Implemented generation of compiler report for kernel arguments [201f902]

>  - Implemented SYCL 2020 [sub-group](doc/extensions/SubGroup/SYCL_INTEL_sub_group.asciidoc#attributes)

Reviewer 5: That is not a SYCL 2020 functionality you are referring to, that is an Intel extension

   atomic functions. [0bbb68ee]
 - Switched to ignoring `-O0` option for device code when compiling for FPGA
   with hardware [7d94edf4]
 - Allowed for known aliases to be used for `-fsycl-targets`. Passing
   `*-unknown-unknown-sycldevice` components of the SYCL target triple is no
   longer necessary. [9778952a]
 - [ESIMD] Added support for half type in ESIMD intrinsics [d5958ebf]
 - Implemented `sycl::kernel::get_kernel_bundle` method [69a68a6d]
 - Added a diagnostic in case of timing issues for FPGA AOT [c69a3115]
 - Added support for C `memcpy` usages in the device code [76051ccf]
 - [ESIMD] Added support for vectorizing scalar function [3fc66cc]
 - Disabled vectorization and loop transformation passes because loop unrolling
   in "SYCL optimization mode" used default heuristic, which is tuned the code
   for CPU and might not have been profitable for other devices [ff6929e6]
### SYCL Library
 - Added an exception throw if no matched device is found when
   `SYCL_DEVICE_FILTER` is set regardless of `device_selector` used [ef4e6dd]
 - Changed event status update to complete without waiting when run on CUDA
   devices [be7c1cb]

>  - Added `sycl::bit_cast` [d4b66bd]

Reviewer 5: Isn't it a new feature?

Author: Sometimes it's hard to say whether a change is a feature or an improvement. This is very simple one and has been supported in `detail` namespace for some time already, that's why I put it into improvements section.
Please, let me know if you prefer having it in the `new features` section.

Reviewer 5: Strictly speaking, `detail` was not intended for users, so for them it is more like a new feature, I guess.

   backend [fa382d6]
 - Introduced pooling for USM and buffer allocations in Level Zero backend
   [4cffedd]
 - Added support for vectors with length of 3 and 16 elements in sub-group load
   and store operations [4e6452d]
 - Added interop types for images for Level Zero and OpenCL backends [a58cfef]
 - Improved plugins discovery - continue discovering even if a plugin fails to
   load [8c07803]
 - Implemented queries for IEEE rounded `sqrt`/`div` in Level Zero backend
   [91b35c4]
 - Added SYCL 2020 `interop_handle::get_backend()` method [041ca27]
 - [ESIMD] Deprecated `block_load`/`block_store` and
   `simd::copy_from`/`simd::copy_to` [5c41ed6]
 - Allowed for `const` and `volatile` pointer in sub-group `load` operation
   [50edee4]
 - Replaced use of `interop<>` with SYCL 2020 `backend_return_t<>` in
   `interop_handle` [d08c21a]
 - [ESIMD] Moved ESIMD APIs to `sycl::ext::intel::experimental::esimd` namespace
   [92da579]
 - Added global offset support for Level Zero backend [9ca2f911]
 - [ESIMD] Changed `simd::replicate` API by adding suffixes into the names to
   reflect the order of template arguments [e45408ad]

>  - Disabled persistent device code caching by default [48f6bc9e]

Reviewer 5: Why is that an improvement?

 - Introduced `SYCL_REDUCTION_DETERMINISTIC` macro which forces reduction
   algorithms to produce stable results [a3fc51a4]
 - Improved `SYCL_DEVICE_ALLOWLIST` format [9216b49d]
 - Added `SYCL_DISABLE_PARALLEL_FOR_RANGE_ROUNDING` macro to disable range
   rounding [5c4275ac]
 - Disabled range rounding by default when compiling for FPGA [5c4275ac]
 - [ESIMD] Fixed a bug in `simd_view::operator--` [ccc97e23]
 - Fixed a memory leak for host USM allocations [c18c3456]
 - Fixed possible crashes that could happen when `sycl::free` is called while

>    there are still running kernels [c74f05d6]

Reviewer 5: Aren't those bugfixes?

 - Deprecated `sycl::buffer::get_count()`, please use `sycl::buffer::size()`
   instead [baf2ed9d]
 - Implemented `sycl::group_barrier` free function [48363902]

>  - Added support of [SYCL_INTEL_enqueue_barrier extension](doc/extensions/EnqueueBarrier/enqueue_barrier.asciidoc) for CUDA backend [2e978482]

Reviewer 5: New feature?

Author: It has been supported for a lot of time for other backends, so I'm considering it being more like a improvement that now it works for CUDA backend as well.

# July'21 release notes

Release notes for commit range 6a49170027fb..962909fe9e78

## New features

>  - Implemented SYCL 2020 specialization constants [07b27965] [ba3d657]

Reviewer 6: should we mention the SYCL 2020 Exception support and/or the sRGB extension?

Author: There are not included in the July release from github. The release includes everything up to 962909fe9e78bd597594d67c5c5be7eacf8fb10a.

   extension specification [edaee9b]
 - Added [initial draft](doc/extensions/LevelZeroBackend/LevelZeroBackend.md)
   for querying of free device memory in LevelZero backend extension [fa428bf]
 - Added [InvokeSIMD](doc/extensions/InvokeSIMD/InvokeSIMD.asciidoc) and
   [Uniform](doc/extensions/Uniform/Uniform.asciidoc) extensions [72e1611]
 - Added [Matrix Programming Extension for DPC++ document](doc/extensions/Matrix/dpcpp-joint-matrix.asciidoc) [ace4c733]
 - Implemented SYCL 2020 `sycl::span` [9356d53]
 - Added [device-if](doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc) extension
   [4fb95fc]
 - Added a [programming guide](doc/MultiTileCardWithLevelZero.md) for
   multi-tile and multi-card under Level Zero backend [d581178a]

## Improvements
### SYCL Compiler
 - Use `opencl-aot` instead of `aoc` when AOT flow for FPGA Emulator is
   triggered [3a99558]
 - Allowed for using an external host compiler [6f0ad1a]
 - Cleaned up preprocessing output when `-fsycl` option is passed [3a18db6]
 - Allowed kernel names in anonymous namespace [e47dbad]
 - Set default value of `-sycl-std` to `2020` when `-fsycl-is-device` or

>    `-fsycl-is-host` specified [680adc0]

Reviewer 7: `-fsycl-is-device` and `-fsycl-is-host` are `cc1` options and are not exposed to the user.  Maybe:  Set default value of `-sycl-std` to 2020 for SYCL enabled compilations.

Author: Thanks!
